- Yeah, thanks so much for having me again.
- Yeah, it's great to have you here.
You know, maybe we just remind people
of the last time you were here.
You wrote a really cool book,
"The Power of Python."
And I think it's really cool
that you're here to talk about Python.
wrote a really cool book called,
I think it was Python Interviews.
Is that the, do I have the title correct?
- Yes, that's correct.
- Yeah, and that was back in episode 156,
way back in 2018, like three years ago, I guess,
more than that.
But it was a history book, so I was looking back, right?
It's fine, it's still relevant.
People can check that out.
And I really love some of the stories
that you told on there.
I love, I think it was Alex Martelli,
you interviewed him and talked about
how Google Video and YouTube were sort of competing neck and neck.
And that was sort of a Python versus C++ story.
That's probably the one that stuck with me the most.
>> Yeah, I really enjoyed that one.
Although there's some good stuff in the Brett Cannon interview as well.
>> Yeah, there's great stuff all over.
I'm just trying to think of the one that I can remember years later, you know?
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah, so, yeah, well, it's been a couple years since you've been on the show.
What have you been up to?
- Yeah.
- Well, since that book came out,
I have been pretty prolific in my writing
and continue to write more Python books.
For example, I've written one on WX Python and Report Lab.
I redid Python 101, which was my first book,
and I completely--
- Report Lab is, yeah, sorry,
Report Lab is about like working with PDFs, right?
- Yes, you can use it to create PDFs.
But that book also covers how to edit,
or I shouldn't say edit,
how to read and get data out of an existing PDF as well.
- Yeah, cool.
You got a couple of 101, 201 type of books as well
for learning Python.
- Yep.
Python 101 is for beginners
and 201 is kind of intermediate advanced.
- So if I was like a sophomore, I might take that.
- Yes.
(both laughing)
- Cool, so what are you doing these days?
Are you doing the independent thing
with your authoring and creating?
Are you doing consulting?
What do you have to do?
- Oh, I still would do a full-time job.
I write Python code that tests
an embedded C++ application with Python.
- Oh, nice.
- It's really neat, but I also,
you know, kind of as a hobby/side job,
I write for myself.
I write these books,
and I occasionally contribute to real Python as well.
- A lot of good stuff going over at real Python.
Dan and crew keeps that,
the content flowing over there for sure.
- Yep.
- Yeah, absolutely.
So we're gonna talk about building GUIs or G-U-I
as some people say them.
I know I'm a GUI.
Are you a GUI or are you a G-U-I sort of person?
- I usually call it GUI.
- Yeah, me too.
So we're going to talk about those for Python, which I think is interesting because there are and have been there are decent options, but it's not a place where Python has traditionally received a ton of focus and energy on building a lot of these frameworks have to do with taking another framework that's a nice cross platform framework and like making it friendly for Python, right? I'm thinking of like, yeah, like cute, or even WX Python, right?
WX Python, right?
- Yeah, it's usually a C++ wrapper that pre-existed Python
and then it got wrapped with bindings of some sort.
- Yeah, exactly.
A lot of these, especially the ones that do native widgets,
those are really just wrappers over the operating system
when doing APIs, right?
Like Win32 or what is it?
Cocoa on macOS, those kinds of things, right?
So it's like some thin layer, then some adaption,
adapting thing for Python, right?
- Yeah, I think there's only a handful
that aren't wrapping something else like,
bewares Toga, I don't believe is wrapping the native,
I was trying to look for native,
I guess it is wrapping in a way,
but it's not wrapping a pre-existing framework.
- Right, right, it's probably super low level.
Like here is a literally create a window that is a button
and that's it, like not like Qt or something, Qt-
- Yeah, I think Togo is actually like,
trying to render the Cocoa widgets
or the Win32 widgets itself,
rather than calling like Qt or WX.
- Yeah, yeah, and there's some value to that.
There's some value to that.
So I thought the place that we could start
is maybe a survey of these different libraries
that we could use.
- Sure.
So let's start with Tinker, TK, Enter,
which is really the Python interface to TCL, TK, right?
- Yep.
- So this one comes built in, right?
I'm here on the Python 3.9.6 documentation,
and I guess this is the official way
to create GUIs with Python, right?
I mean, in the sense that it ships with it.
- It ships with it.
However, on like Linux, the system Python does not come with it.
Okay.
And I believe, I believe Mac is the same way.
You have to install it separately for its system Python too.
Yeah.
That wouldn't surprise me.
Well, you know, the, the system Python and Mac is all sorts of outdated
and, and whatnot, basically.
Right.
Like two seven, who knows what, right.
But yeah, but it's always surprises me when I go to import Tkinter and it's
it's like, oh, it's not there.
Like what the?
- Yeah, exactly.
So, you know, tell us about this one.
Like what's the good side?
When would you use it or would you use it?
When wouldn't you use it?
- For me, I don't like it because it looks old fashioned,
but mainly because it draws all its own ridges,
just like some of the other GUI toolkits.
So basically when you create a Tkinter GUI,
you know it's a Tkinter GUI because it doesn't look native.
However, you can use a Tkinter,
the code can be written without classes.
You could write it completely functionally
and still make it work.
So, you know, as a learning way to create a GUI,
it might be a good first, you know,
a good beginner or first GUI to create with.
- Yeah, absolutely.
Here I put up on the screen for us to see,
there's like this TK Enter Hotel Management System.
It definitely doesn't, if I didn't see the top bar,
I couldn't tell you what OS that's from,
'cause it doesn't look like the OS that I know, right?
Although there's another example,
I'll put these in the show notes.
There's a pretty nice one that's hosting
some kind of sort of, it's like a predates Jupyter
or something like Hotes Map Plotlibs,
exploration and stuff.
And that one, that looks like a pretty solid app to me.
- Yeah, Tkinter did add a sub-module called TTK,
which does look a lot more native across platforms.
So you can make it look nice actually,
if you spend the time,
but you're going to have trouble
finding good examples online,
'cause a lot of them just use the old interface.
And one other thing I do want to note about Tkinter
is it's themable.
So if you want it to look,
and you want to add themes to your GUI,
you know, TKED is an option for that.
- Oh, interesting.
It was like, so for example,
you could give it a macOS like theme
that turns on in that platform in a Linux theme,
maybe in a dark mode and a not dark mode.
- Yeah, I was thinking of dark modes, light modes,
be giving them a certain, you know, color things,
kind of like a Winamp type skin.
- Yeah.
Oh man, remember how crazy those skins would get?
they'd get like 3D with little holes cut in them.
And yeah, that stuff got, that got a lot of little drawers,
like an alien tongue would shoot out
and that's where like the playlist would be.
Don't do that people.
- Yeah, don't do that.
- Okay, so for the most part, Tkinter is built in-ish,
at least it's sort of somewhat officially
part of Python, right?
- Yes, it is.
- Another one, one that I think of a lot
when I think of cross-platform stuff is Qt, QT.
And PyQt, there's been a lot of different versions
of PyQt, like a lot of stuff with licensing.
So like right here on the homepage, it says licensing.
PyQt is dual license on all the platforms
under GPL-3 and the Riverbank commercial one.
Unlike Qt, PyQt is not available under LGPL,
which is I guess what you would need
for like a commercial closed source app.
And there's another wrapper around Qt
that I think is LGPL.
Like there's a lot of stuff that's just like,
whoa, why is it so complicated?
- Yeah, PyQt is kind of confusing
when it comes to its licensing structure.
- Yeah, which is crazy
'cause I've had this conversation multiple times
and it seems like it, I don't know,
either it never resolves clearly in my mind
or it's just challenging.
But that said, there's really nice apps built with Qt.
So for example, like one of the database tools I use
for working with MongoDB is Robo3T.
And if you look at Robo3T, this thing is glorious
in terms of its sort of native look and feel.
Like if you go to the robomongo.org,
scroll down for the screenshots,
there's the three OS's side by side
and every one of them looks like it belongs
on that platform, right?
- Yeah.
You can get a little bit simpler with,
instead of using PyQ, you could use Qt for Python,
which is the new name for PySide.
- That's right.
- And it has a more permissive licensing structure.
- That's the one I was thinking of, yes, thank you.
Yeah, they renamed that to Qt for Python, right?
- I believe so.
Although the import is still PySide.
- Is it still PySide?
How interesting.
- I like PySite 6, I think, yes.
- Yeah, how interesting.
So this, I think, Qt's a pretty solid option.
I feel like I see Qt being used in embedded systems
and other types of things.
Like I said, I started using RoboMongo
just 'cause it seemed like a good app
and like, oh, this is a Qt app.
It's not a, Python is a C++ app,
but it just as well could be.
Like there's nothing fancy about it
that it makes it have to be C++.
It just happens to have been that way.
- Yeah.
Yeah, so what are your thoughts on this as one of the options?
Oh, Qt is really powerful.
You can do a ton.
And while it draws all of its own widgets itself,
it's not actually using the native widgets.
It looks native.
So again--
At least they made an effort, yeah.
Yeah, again, this one is also themable.
If you want to do themes, you can change dark mode,
light mode easily because it's all drawn itself.
I think PyQt and PyQt for Python both support QML,
which is kind of an XML version of the C++ library.
So you can kind of write your GUIs in a markup language.
The nice thing about-- - Yeah, that's right.
It's a little bit like XML or XAML from the Microsoft space.
Yeah, that's right.
- It also has a, what you see is what you get editor,
I think it's Qt Designer.
It works for both C++ and Python.
I believe the Python side,
you have to do some special imports
to actually use the UI file it generates.
- Okay, interesting.
Yeah, that seems like a really valuable thing to me,
to visually be able to say,
I want this widget to be here,
I want this one to stretch like that, and so on.
- Yeah, I work with a bunch of C++ Qt guys,
and they use the designer,
but occasionally it will do crazy things
when your design gets really complex,
where it's really hard to get stuff to stretch
the way you want it to.
Sometimes you just have to drop into the code
to make it work right.
- Yeah, well, I think that's probably the case
with many of the frameworks, right?
Not just these Python ones we're highlighting,
but Xcode, .NET, whatever, right?
- I think that's just a problem with auto-generated UI code.
Whenever you use a designer like that,
our Visual Studio, you're going to run into quirks.
- Yeah, yeah, for sure.
Next up on our list here is Kivy.
Kivy, I heard about a lot from,
I think sort of building mobile apps with Python
and in the rest of the ways,
it's kind of got this game,
draw your own UI sort of feel to it.
- Yeah, it's also cross-platform.
It runs on mobile too though.
So you can deploy its apps to Android and Apple OS.
But yeah, a lot of the stuff on there--
well, I should back up.
It was originally developed for multi-touch.
So like Microsoft's original Surface Table,
I think is what it was originally developed for.
But obviously, it also works great on multi-touch phones
and whatnot.
But yeah, all of its widgets are drawn by Kiwi itself.
So they look like a Kivi app most of the time.
- Yeah, they have a gallery over here.
And in the gallery,
they even have like some surface table exploration stuff,
like the city of Marseille map exploration type thing.
- They have a Kivi garden, I believe,
that also showcases lots of custom widgets.
- Yeah.
So when I look at the,
I'm scrolling through the gallery here,
I feel like there's a lot of 2D sort of interactive things,
a lot of games or stuff like that, right?
So if I wanted to build an app that maybe looked like it used
the Windows-rich text box and the Windows button,
so it looked like a Windows 10 button on Windows 10
and a Windows 11 button with curved edges,
it's not that kind of framework, right?
>> No, it's not.
And I believe Kiwi is based on,
written on top of Pygame.
So it has, that's why it can do games so well.
- Right.
Yeah, it sounds familiar to me as well.
And apparently the winner of the Python Discord Code Jam 6
was Dunning Kiwi.
So that's pretty cool.
- That is cool.
- As well as second place.
So, is there a third place one down here?
- Yeah, it is.
They did a clean sweep of the podium with Kivy.
So that's pretty impressive, actually.
- Yeah.
I've actually played one of their games on my phone before
and they seem pretty well done.
- Nice.
Another one that's gotten a lot of traction
and has its own opinions for how it works
is PySimpleGUI.
I think Mike Barnett, if I'm remembering correctly,
is working on that.
- Yeah.
Yeah, it's the idea is to make it super simple to just get a basic UI up and running, right?
Yeah. So PySimpleGUI wraps, I think, four or five other frameworks.
So it wraps Tkinter, DbxPython, PyQt, Remy, which is a mobile thing,
and something else. And basically gives you the same API for all of them.
So that, you know, if you write your code once and then you just change the import from like import PySimpleGUI to
import PySimpleGUI_cute or PySimpleGUI_wx
You can get that native look and feel because you're using WX or cute
Oh, that's a really cool aspect right that you can swap out the the widget engine or something basically. Mm-hmm. Yep
the default is key enter but
Yeah, probably because it's the least dependencies and you don't have to think about which kind of license you're doing what with.
Yes.
Interesting. Okay, so this is a pretty cool one. If you're just trying to get a dialogue up that like has one or two buttons and an input and a progress bar, maybe this is a good option.
- They can do quite a bit of complex GUIs too.
There's a demo package that they have
that shows how to integrate it with Matplotlib
and OpenCV and lots of other things.
These examples don't show the advanced stuff it can do.
- Right, I'm sort of paging through the gallery,
the screenshot that they have on the site there,
which we'll link to.
- And again, since it's using Kikenter,
it also does themes natively.
- At least for the Tkinter part.
- Yeah, exactly.
Yeah, yeah, super cool.
Okay, that's another option we got out there.
One that you put in the list
that I haven't really done anything with is DeerPyGUI,
a fast and powerful graphical user interface toolkit
for Python with minimal dependencies.
Tell us about this one.
- This one I haven't played with very much yet,
but I believe the guy who created it
has been working a lot on it lately.
And it has a really neat interface.
I don't think it's wrapping anything,
but I could be mistaken.
- It looks very focused on providing animated
and interactive aspects for like scientific visualization
and exploration.
- Yeah, I think it is.
I don't believe it tries to look native necessarily either,
but it has a very slick interface.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, it does.
There's a lot of cool stuff that's going on here.
Okay, so that's a neat one.
And I guess one that I didn't properly cover,
oh yeah, 'cause I didn't pull up in our little list here,
but is a toga from B-ware,
you touched on that, right?
- Yeah.
- So all the stuff over B-ware is super neat.
There's a lot of nice things going on.
definitely the native widgets feels,
I just always feel like,
"This thing doesn't really belong here."
When I see an app, it just looks like,
you're like, "This is some clearly cross-platform,
not really this platform feel."
>> Yes.
>> I don't know. I appreciate the native widgets aspects,
but it's also listed in
the maturity level as early development.
So I'm not sure if this is ready for you to pick up and build with yet.
Yeah, not really is my understanding.
And oddly enough, it's been in early development for like the last five years.
So it's been really slow to develop, which I mean,
they're trying to do it from the ground up and they're not wrapping anything.
So it's somewhat understandable.
But I think they recently added Android support.
So I think that they're focusing more on the mobile stuff than,
you know, like Windows and Macs, native OSes.
Yeah.
The last commit was a merged PR from Russell Keith-McGee four days ago.
So there's still action.
Yeah, they're still working on it.
Nice, nice.
All right, well, that brings us over to the WXPython,
which is another one of these options in this space,
but that's what we're going to focus on in this particular episode, right?
Sure, yep.
So give us the quick overview of WX Python,
sort of compared to these other options we've been covering.
So WX Python is again a C++ project.
It wraps WX widgets, or Wix widgets, I've heard it called.
It works on Windows, Mac, and Linux, and Raspberry Pi.
The big thing about WX Python is that it does do native widgets
wherever possible on all platforms.
Yeah, that's cool.
That is really cool.
It also provides a lot of custom widgets in case you need them for certain purposes.
Like some, I believe, I think it was Mac that didn't have a toggle widget for a long time,
so they provided their own toggle widget for it.
Right, it's the GUI equivalent of a polyfill.
If like that feature is not supported, but you want it, well, like, all right, here's
that something that'll do for now.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, yeah, very cool.
So it looks to me like it checks a lot of the right boxes.
What's the licensing story?
- It's very permissive.
- Let's see, I'll pull up the repo
and hit their license doc and see what I can find.
- I know they called it the WX Python license,
but I'm trying to remember.
That's right. It looks LGPL ish.
Yeah. I think it is mostly LGPL.
Yeah. Cool. Okay.
So that's better than multi license confusing.
Like the C layer has one license and the Python layer has another license,
but then there's a commercial license.
so it seems like it's pretty easy for you to just to decide to adopt it and use
it on your project.
- Yep, I would agree with that.
And it's also extremely stable.
They almost never break your code
when they release a new version.
- Okay, that's cool.
I heard that it rose from the ashes.
(laughing)
- Yeah.
- We've got the Phoenix release
and then the legacy or traditional version.
What's the story of that?
- Okay, so Python 3 came out
and a lot of people fussed about supporting it.
And it was a pretty big deal to port WXPython to Python 3
because WXPython has a really small group
of core developers.
But eventually he created,
Robin Dunn is the main guy behind WXPython currently.
And he decided, well, we're gonna call it Project Phoenix
while I get this working.
And I think he actually switched the way he binded
to Wix widgets at the time,
'cause he went from like Swig to, I believe SIP,
which is a different type of binding.
- Okay. - And that made it
a lot easier to support both Python 2.7
and I think it was 3.4 was the first three release
for DevX Python.
And that also made it pip installable.
So that was super awesome when he got that working.
- So if I wanna use it,
I can just pip install DevX Python or Wix Python
as I'm learning that I might want to say it that way.
- Yes, that's correct.
There's a caveat on Linux that sometimes you need
to have a couple of extra Linux dependencies installed.
But other than that, pip install should work.
- Yeah, well, that's pretty standard, right?
If you're doing gooey stuff on Linux,
there's elements there you gotta add.
So it doesn't seem outrageous.
- No.
- Yeah, so another thing that I'm a big fan of
to the extent that they work,
and the better that it works, the more I'm a fan of it,
is the, like the GUI designer.
So there's two over here, right?
We've got like this Wix form builder and the Wix Glade.
I think I tried the Wix form builder
and it just, it kept crashing.
Not like it would start and was unstable,
like it would not start for me.
And I don't know what the deal,
maybe it was the version of macOS
that was running on or something.
But what's the story?
Are these things that people would use?
Like what's the story around the WYSIWYG side of these?
- WSYWYG's Python traditionally hasn't had really
a WYSIWYG editor, but people have tried to build them.
So I think WSYWYG's Glade is probably the one
that's been around the longest.
- Okay.
- And probably the best supported.
I don't think it, I think it supports the core widgets of Debian X Python.
If you were to pull up the Debian X Python demo app, there are like 100, I would say
at least 100 widgets, maybe more, maybe 200.
So the core widgets, you know, like buttons.
Is that, do I find that under widgets?
You would find that under, let me see, downloads.
Downloads, there you go.
Unfortunately, it's actually something you run locally.
- Yeah, sure, sure.
So you could download, I think I have run that before
and you basically, it's like got all these windows
that'll show you little use cases
for this widget or that widget, right?
- Yeah, it also shows you the code
and you can edit the code live in the demo
and see how it changes the widgets.
But anyway, so yeah, I lost my train of thought.
- That's okay, well, I was talking about,
We're talking about Glade and the GUI stuff, yeah.
- Yeah, I believe it does a decent enough job.
I think it outputs a Python file, so that's nice.
It doesn't put, you know, like Qt's designer
outputs a UI file that you have to figure out
how to import and then use.
This one actually outputs a Python file.
- Oh, that's nice.
Yeah, that's really good.
So I'm looking at the screen here
and it looks like Audacity,
the well-known audio editing app is built in DubX.
I'm guessing, otherwise there's no reason
they would feature it.
- I believe that's true.
I'm not sure if it's Wix Widgets itself.
- Yeah, it's on the Wix Widgets site.
I'm pretty sure it's a C sort of thing.
But yeah, these are pretty good looking apps
that you can like sort of page through
all their screenshots on just wixwidgets.org.
almost even like an auto trader looking thing
and like a diff tool.
File merge, yeah, Audacity.
- Yeah, I believe one of the Linux diff tools
is written with WX Python.
And I had heard that the Dropbox UI
was written with WX for a while.
I don't know if it still is or not.
- Yeah.
Cool.
So it seems like there's quite a rich library
for working with these things with DevX Python or Wix Python.
- Mm-hmm. Yeah. - Yeah.
And I guess maybe one of the nice ways to explore this would be...
Where am I going to go? I'm going to go over here a little bit.
To talk about some of the things you covered in a recent book that you wrote.
Not super recent, but somewhat recent.
Creating GUI applications with Wix Python,
which is pretty cool.
And a comment from the livestream out there,
Juergen says, "Congrats on the successful fundraiser
for your latest book," which is not this book, but like--
- No.
- And what book is that that you're just working on now?
- I'm working on one that talks about automating Excel
with Python using OpenPyXL.
- That's right, yeah.
Well, that's certainly a hot topic indeed.
But what's the story with this creating GUI apps
with Wix Python in your book?
It feels like from the extent that I got to read it,
which is not all of it, but some of it,
as a quick introduction of how to work with the widgets
and stuff and get some stuff on the screen,
understand the layout a little bit.
And then it goes through and just build
like a bunch of different apps,
like a nice little image viewer,
a database viewer tool that uses SQL alchemy
to like explore stuff there,
a calculator, an archiver, mp3 tag editor,
those types of things.
You wanna maybe just tell us like kind of
some of the key elements.
Before we actually, before we get into those,
let's just maybe, it's hard in code,
but on audio to talk about code,
but maybe just give us like a sense of what is it like
to get a window and a button on the screen
or something like that?
- I'm sure.
So, you know, Database Python, much like PyQt,
they're all class-based.
So you're going to be inheriting from different classes
to create all the widgets online.
Whereas with Tkinter, you don't have to do that.
- I see.
So you might make like a window class
and like a layout main section class or something like that.
- Kind of.
Layouts usually aren't needed to be subclassed,
but like you subclass a frame, which is the main window.
You can subclass a panel, which is kind of like the tabs
on your Firefox or Chromebook.
You can create a notebook object that has multiple panels
when each of those panels is a tab, basically.
- I see, so it is like a multi-doc version
or style that it'll support.
- Correct.
- Yeah, okay, cool.
And then within your frame, you have your panel,
and then within the panel, you have your widgets.
And so those are your children widgets,
like you have your buttons or your scroll bar
or your check boxes or whatever.
The code can get kind of unruly,
but for just creating something really simple,
you can do it in less than 100 lines of code most of the time.
But once you start doing anything complex with Debian-X Python,
you're going to start adding a lot of code.
- Right, because if you're gonna have, say,
three buttons and a text field,
and you want to figure out how they lay out,
there's a couple of things that you're gonna put
just on the layout side,
and then you're gonna have to hook potentially the events.
- You can abstract that away a little bit,
so it's not too bad.
Like if all the buttons do something similar,
then you can make that really short.
But yeah, if all the buttons do something
completely different, then you could,
you know, you'd have a few different functions.
I have written wrappers to make laying that stuff out
simpler so I don't have to repeat the same boilerplate
all the time. - Yeah, of course.
Yeah, as soon as you're like, why is this so complicated?
Why do I keep doing this?
And maybe that's the time to think about,
how do I do it just one more time
with a little more polish and then never again?
- Yeah. - Yeah.
- So the widgets have events, right?
Like on a Windows, it'd be like a WM key down,
like when 32 event that is then translated
to the Wix event, which then calls back into,
say Python, right?
And what you do is you give it just either a class level
or just regular function, say,
whenever somebody clicks this button,
just call this function, right?
- Yes, that's usually like for buttons,
it's like WX.eventButton,
and then you just bind it to a function.
- Right.
- Or you could bind it to the entire app,
if you wanted to, so it captures the clicks.
- Yeah, what I thought was interesting
looking through the framework was,
in many UI framework, like native,
compiled, built-in frameworks, they don't,
basically the button gets a click, or it doesn't.
or somebody clicks the thing outside of it or it doesn't,
but in the JavaScript,
we have like bubbling events that go up and down.
So if I click on a label, but the label doesn't handle it,
but somewhere higher up, maybe it's in a div
and the div is handling the event,
like that would catch it, right?
So you have this ability to say,
go up until it's the right level to deal with this action.
And it looks like WX Python has that as well.
- Yes, it does.
- Yeah, that was a little surprising
that you can sort of bind the same event at different levels
and then either capture it or let it keep flowing up.
So they both get hit, I guess.
- Yeah, you can do that and you can execute your event
and then you can say, I think it's event.skip
and it'll go to the next level.
- Right, that's like, don't let me consume the event,
let it keep going, bubble it up or something.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, really nice.
So one thing that you talked about
that I thought was interesting
before we get into maybe a little more detail
is you talked about, it's really nice to have
a conception of what your app is going to look like,
especially around layout, right?
- Yes.
- So you recommended, well, one is just like
writing stuff out on paper, which is always good.
But you also recommended using Balsamiq
as something where you could potentially sketch out the UI.
>> Yeah, I really like GrubBalsamic because it
just makes laying stuff out a breeze.
You could also use that Qt Designer
because it's free and open source.
You could use that to draw a layout too.
>> Right. Even though your destination is not ultimately Qt.
>> Correct.
>> But it still lets you drag the widgets around, right?
>> Yeah. So you could still get
a good idea of what you want to look like using that.
>> Yeah. I guess if you had
a really old version of Visual Basic laying around.
>> Yes, that also works.
I thought about that.
>> The VB6, I mean, that thing went out of support
like in the '90s, but you might get it to run.
But yeah, the Boltzaw Make 1, I really like this.
I've used this for prototyping a couple of things.
I think I used it a lot when I was building the Talk Python
training platform and stuff like that.
It's one of these wireframe type of tools
that specifically is not meant to look native or finished.
Right. It kind of looks as if you had drawn it by hand, like the web browser.
It's, it's sort of wiggly lines as if you'd sketch that out.
Right. I like this thing a lot.
It's a good recommendation.
Yeah, I really like it.
It's not super expensive and it does a good job of sketching the
ideas that you have in your head.
Yeah, for sure.
A couple of live stream comments.
Just to get a quick shout out to you.
Alexander says, interesting.
It sounds like React in Python when we're talking about the event bubbling.
Yeah.
Very cool.
And then David has equated you to Brian Okken.
Mike is to Python GUIs as Brian Okken is to pytest, indeed.
Yeah, so really cool.
I guess one more general concept let's talk about a little bit
before we maybe just touch on some of the lessons
and whatnot from the various apps and the types of things
that people could go play around with.
And I'm guessing the source code for these apps
is just on GitHub available.
Even if people don't have the book,
they could probably go dig it up.
- Yes, it is.
- Yeah, same for all my stuff.
And the extra thing that I really wanna talk about
is layout.
So layout's interesting, right?
You've got these different, what are they called, resizers?
Resizers, not resizer, sizers.
- Yes, resizers in WXPython.
Just sizers, yes.
- Yeah, so if you're gonna put like two buttons
next to each other,
and you just want them to take up 80% of the space combined
and have a little bit of margin or something.
If you just put them in a location,
well, that might be true for their size at first,
but if you move the window, obviously not so much.
Right, you just stay there.
They're not gonna move, they're not gonna change size.
So talk about the different layout sizers
and how you can combine them.
How do you build like real composed UI worlds?
You know, you could use absolute positioning.
I don't recommend it,
but if you made your frame unresizable,
then you could totally do that.
- Yeah.
- But if you want to use sizers, I usually use box sizers.
They support vertical or horizontal alignment.
So if you set it, you know, for vertical,
which I think is the default,
it will add their widgets from left to right across,
I mean, horizontal.
Sorry, I'm getting myself all confused.
All right, vertical is top to bottom,
horizontal is left to right.
So as you add them, the widgets will stack in that direction.
And the nice thing is you can nest the sizers.
So if I wanted to add columns, I could
put three or four vertical sizers,
box sizers inside of a regular horizontal sizer,
or vice versa, to just create these kind of stacks
of widgets on my UI.
All right.
So let's think about this.
Imagine I want to build like a photo viewer thing.
And I want on the left,
I want a vertical list of all of the image names,
you know, just the short image names,
then maybe folders.
And then I click the folder and then in the right,
I get like a grid of photos.
So overall, I've got the panel
and then I would put a vertical sizer
that has the two pieces, right?
- Yes, probably.
- The one on the left would be another vertical sizer
that just takes a bunch of like little image name display
and things, and then the right, maybe a horizontal one,
or does it have to wrap?
Would that wrap around,
or would it just shoot off the screen to the right eventually
or make them really small or something like that?
- It should make them smaller if you make it too small,
You can also set size hints in DebX Python that says,
do not reduce this window beyond 400 by 400 pixels
or whatever it is.
- Like a scroll bar or something like that.
- Yeah, you can tell.
So that's actually a different widget.
There's a scrollable panel that you could add
and then the scroll bar will appear
when you resize as appropriate.
- Right, okay.
- Another way you could do that is use a splitter window
and then have some widgets on the right and some on the left.
- Interesting.
Okay.
So you really have to probably think about
how do you compose these things though?
There's not like one super duper layout
that's just gonna do all the stuff.
You're like, here's a section, there's a section, right?
- Yeah, I mean, there is a flex grid sizer and a grid sizer.
So if you know your layout's gonna be kind of
in a grid shape, you could use one of those grid sizers
and lay them out that way.
they're a little bit confusing to work with at first
'cause you're trying to figure out,
where does everything go?
They work great for like a calculator
because that's a grid.
- Right, okay.
And they're probably not changing.
It's a fixed number of nine or whatever things
are going in there.
- And you could nest box sizes inside of the grids
to give yourself more flexibility.
- Make the return button bigger
or something like that as it stretches.
- I believe you can make each cell
on a grid sizer stretched differently.
So you don't actually need to do the nesting.
I was thinking more like if you needed to like have
stacks of widgets in a cell within the grid size sizer,
then you might need to put a different sizer inside of it.
- Yeah, okay, very neat.
Quick feedback from the live stream.
Matt Robin says, "In my last company,
"we used a bunch of Wix Python.
"Your book was an awesome resource."
Super cool. - Oh, cool.
Awesome. - Yeah.
Yeah, very good.
All right, now let's go on and talk about
some of the apps in your book, because I think,
you know, thinking about like,
what are the kinds of apps I could build
with this framework reasonably?
And stuff that fits in a book usually has to fit
that reasonable category.
It's not like, well, we're gonna build Microsoft Word
and like, you know, something that does a zillion things.
So let's see, the first one that you had there was really,
the first meaningful one was like an image viewer,
which is a little bit like a simpler version
of what I'd sort of just described, right?
- Yes.
Yeah, I chose the image viewer
because I knew it wouldn't take a lot of code
to create something that just shows you an image on screen.
And because JPEGs Python uses Pillow underneath,
it can support most image types natively,
which is really handy.
- Yeah, it supports, you know,
the list is like seven or eight different formats,
ping, JPEG, GIF, and on and on, right?
- Which is something that TK enter doesn't do.
It only supports like two or three natively.
And then you have to--
- Give us a BMP and you're like,
how do I get a BMP like in a tip?
Like where did it?
- Yeah, it gets very unhappy if you do that.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So that's cool.
And then it started out as just,
you've got a button that says choose a file
and then you show it on one of these image widgets,
which is pretty straightforward.
But I was still impressed that when you click the button,
it's like a really clear way to open a dialogue
that is the native dialogue.
So in your case, you used your Mac file dialogue
and it has like all the stuff you'd expect on the left.
It's got like your favorites and your tags
and whatever customizations you've done
to your finder, whatever.
- Yeah, because Python does their native widget.
- Exactly.
And it's always drove me crazy that like,
"Oh, I know on the real OS,
I can navigate to another folder this way,
but now I'm just hitting the up arrow over and over again."
And it's just those little things,
it's nice to have it native.
- Yes, I agree.
I feel your pain, so.
(both laughing)
- Yeah, so to like, for example, open up file dialogue,
you create a context manager and you just say with,
I don't remember the exact command,
but you give it basically the file description
and then the file filter, and you say open,
and you just check to see if they hit okay versus cancel,
and then you work with it in the context.
- All the DebX Python dialogues,
and I think maybe even the frames
support using them as a context manager
to open and show them.
- Yeah, it would make sense if you wanted to create
some equivalent of a modal dialogue,
but a custom one that you create,
put that in a with block too, right?
Would that work?
- If you inherit from DbxDialog, I believe it will, yes.
- Okay.
Yeah, super neat.
So I guess you probably have to learn
your class hierarchy, it sounds.
Like I gotta know, this one derives from frame,
that one derives from dialog.
- Unfortunately, there is a bit of a learning curve, yes,
but once you've got the top level widgets figured out,
which are frame, dialog, and window,
and you almost never use window,
It's not too bad.
- Yeah.
Yeah, very cool.
All right, another one that you built
was the database viewer,
based on SQLAlchemy, ObjectListView, and so on.
And tell us about that.
- So I actually wrote this example a long time ago
for my blog, and then I updated it for my book.
I've always liked SQLAlchemy,
and I realized that I could create a SQLAlchemy model class
and use it with Databricks Python
because they have a third party widget
called the object list view
that basically matches a model
in SQLAlchemy almost exactly.
So I can kind of combine the two classes
and make them work together in a way.
So that's kind of what I did.
I just made it so they could open up a SQLite database
in the book.
- You basically see the tables
and then click on them and get the records
or something like that?
- Yes, you can see the records.
I think I made it so I can edit the records too.
Or maybe that was just on my blog that I did that.
- Yeah, what widget do you use
that shows basically the Excel looking view?
- That's object list view.
Debugs Python has its own native widget
called WRX list control.
And object list view is kind of a wrapper of that widget
that makes it a lot easier to work with, in my opinion.
- Yeah.
What about animations?
I know that doesn't have anything to do with the app
that we're talking about,
but is there some sort of support for like changing,
changing the screen,
or if I'm gonna put something on the screen,
like I wanna build a dashboard that is maybe looking
at all the analytics on our system
and it updates once a second, how easy is that to do?
- So if you're talking like a graph.
a graph or even if it just has numbers,
like here's the current flow rate of such and such,
or the number of users on the site
versus like the minutes of video watched today,
up to date by the second.
- You have a couple, yeah, you have a couple.
Debix widgets has a, I believe it's called a device context,
debix.dc, it has a couple of different variants of that
you can use to basically draw whatever you want.
And it's the basis for creating a lot of the custom widgets
that you'll see in the DAPEX Python demo.
So you could use that to like draw
any custom widgets you want.
- I see, so you're just given like a rectangle
or whatever and just go crazy with the draw commands on it.
- Yes.
The alternative is that DAPEX Python supports matplotlib
and can embed it easily.
And it also has its own pyplot library.
So it can draw them without matplotlib itself.
So both of those are also options.
>> Yeah, very nice.
What's the external super custom control world look like?
So we've got the Wix widgets,
but are there other third-party libraries that you get?
Like, here's a really fancy editable grid type of thing,
or autocomplete drop-downs,
or is there an ecosystem around those types of things?
I remember in Visual Basic and Windows forums,
there was whole companies based around building
those little extensions.
- Well, I know the Object List View
was a third-party one for a while,
and it still is third-party,
but I think the actual C++ version of it
has outstripped the current wrapper for it,
so the current wrapper doesn't follow it very well anymore.
Besides that, there used to be a guy, Andrea Gavanna, I believe is his name.
He created a ton of awesome custom widgets for DbxPython.
And eventually they got wrapped into the Python framework itself.
So now it's like import wx.agw and you have access to all of those custom widgets within
DbxPython.
But besides those, there's not a lot out there that I can think of that are like just custom
ones you'd add on.
Right.
I was doing some quick searching for whether or not there's an awesome list, basically,
for those types of things.
I couldn't find it, but maybe people...
Someone out there knows of one they can send it to us, and I'll put it in the show notes.
Cool.
Yeah.
built was one that would look at basically zip files
or tarball and pull those apart.
And what are some of the cool takeaways from that?
- Oh, for me, it was fun to dig into Python's native
tar and libraries, which I haven't played with that much.
And I was originally going to include the zip file,
but zip files tended to be more buggy
when I was playing with it.
So I just stuck with tarballs to keep it simple.
But my takeaway is that it works really well with Dubix Python.
I try to show newer concepts like Pathlib in this book using in conjunction with the
tar file library.
Yeah, Pathlib is nice.
Yeah.
It's not entirely obvious when you first get to it that the division operator has been
taken over.
No, it's not.
to combine elements, but at the same time,
it is quite neat once you learn it.
>> Yeah, the syntax always throws me when I see those examples.
I'm like, "What? Oh, yeah."
>> Right. That's how it works. Yeah.
All same thing for date time and time deltas.
>> Yes. Then you mix those with f-strings and you get a whole other world.
>> Yeah, absolutely. All right.
Another one that you discussed was creating an application for NASA's API.
I don't know what NASA's API is, but that sounds fun.
Tell us about that.
So this one was actually recommended to me
by the Kickstarter people that backed the book.
They were like, so whenever I do a Kickstarter,
I ask the backers, what ideas do you guys have?
What do you think would be a good addition?
And someone was like, well, NASA's API is basically
open source.
You can query it if you have a license API key.
and you can make it show you basically any pictures
that NASA has publicly available.
So the NASA API will let you get photos of the moon,
get photos of their launches, get photos of Mars,
you know, whatever.
- Nice.
- They really wanted an example of how do you make
Databricks Python hook up to a web API?
So that's kind of what this chapter is about.
- Yeah, that's a pretty cool example, right?
a lot of fun stuff that you can check out there.
>> Yeah. I think it was fun.
>> So at api.nasa.gov,
you can go over there and there's a bunch of stuff.
Pad maps for the moons,
two-line element data for earth orbiting,
elements orbiting the earth,
I guess, if you update it in real time.
Nice. So what did you end up actually building?
Like there's a bunch of APIs there.
I think this one only like loads.
It has a basically a list control widget,
which I use to display the search results
when you query the NASA search.
And then when you click on them, it will load the image.
So, you know, if I looked up like
Challenger space flight or Apollo or whatever,
it'll show all the public NASA images in that list box
and you can click on them
and it will load the picture for you.
so you can view the picture.
There's a ton of room for improvement,
like how to download the picture,
which I believe I covered how to download it with the GUI.
But you could also add a tag editor
so you could view the metadata in the images.
- Right, and then you could browse it by,
show me all the pictures of the shuttle
or things from this mission or something like that.
- Or from this date.
- Yeah.
- Cool, that seems like a really fun thing to play with
and just people who are looking to have a fun API
out there in the world to choose.
That seems like a neat one.
- Yeah, it was really neat.
- Yeah, super cool.
So I guess, you know, there's a bunch of other stuff
that we could talk about that you wrote about,
but I think one maybe final thing,
one of the challenges that's not immediately obvious
with Python is how do I take my Python code
and give it to somebody so they can put it in their doc
or their task bar as a picture and click it
and see it without them, without discussing,
here's how you create a virtual environment,
here's how you have the right version of Python,
here's how you pip install the requirements.
Like, how do you distribute this as like what
your normal people would perceive as an application?
- Well, fortunately, the major Python GUI builder,
executable builders support DebX Python.
So in the book, I use PyInstaller as an example,
'cause it can package up WXPython pretty easily.
- Okay.
- It'll basically, you have to give it
a special command line argument
to tell it that it's a windowed application
versus a terminal application.
- Right, I think maybe the default
is to also have a terminal window.
It would distribute it, but you have an odd terminal window
just to the side of your app.
- Yeah, so if you have like any debug in your application,
it'd show up in the terminal window,
which, you know, might not be ideal.
- Yeah, no, for sure.
- So I cover that in the book.
The nice thing about PyInstaller is it also works
for creating executables on Mac and Windows.
Not all of them do that.
I have used Py2XE pretty extensively over the years
and it works great for Windows, but you know, again,
it's not gonna work for anything else.
- Right.
So you found PyInstaller was pretty reliable across the platforms?
Yeah, it works really well.
The only problem I have is that I think if you do the all in one file, Windows Defender
will mark it as malicious and delete it.
Oh, that's not good.
And I think it does that for, you know, whether it's a DebX Python file or not.
Anytime you create the one file executable with PyInstaller, it's like, "Oh, that's a
bad file.
I'm going to delete it for you."
Not ideal.
No.
Someone must have used it to try to package up a virus or something at one point, and
then it got fingerprinted and that was that.
Yeah, I think you can self-sign the file or something to get around that, but I didn't
go into that in the book.
Yeah, I think you got to register as a developer with Microsoft to get a signing certificate
or something. I don't think I've ever done that. So, but there are like when you say
you try to run it, you know, same thing on Mac. It could either sometimes it'll completely
block it. Sometimes it'll say that came from the internet, but we kind of recognize that
person or I guess if you super duper sign it, it'll just run. Yes. Yeah. And depending
on, on the platform. So another thing, you know, one thing that I did is I created this
this little app that runs in the Mac menu bar.
And I created that with py2app.
And then it just gives people a .app file,
well, it's zipped up, but then you unzip it,
it's a .app file.
And then you can just run it.
And that's worked well, but like py2exe,
py2app is a Mac only thing.
Like one platform.
- I know py2app also works with WXPython
from my experience, so.
- Yeah.
Cool. So these are these sort of packaging utilities. They work pretty well for the different
platforms. If you're using DevEx Python. Sounds like.
Yes. Yep. I haven't had any problems with them. You can get squirrelly things with other
packages but not usually with WX.
Yeah, very cool. All right, Mike. Well, I think about is all the time we have to talk
about GUIs and stuff, at least DevEx Python.
But I mean, give us your verdict.
Is there something you enjoy working with,
building apps that people are liking with it?
- Well, I don't know about other people,
but I still use it whenever I can for work.
I'll create simple apps to demo whatever I need to demo
to my employer or my PM.
So, I mean, you can still throw together
a really simple app with WXPython and only 100 lines
or a couple hundred lines and still show off something
that looks awesome across platforms.
- Yeah, yeah, very cool.
Yeah, again, I know I keep going on and on,
but the native bits just make me happy.
A quick couple of questions from the live stream.
One is, it doesn't want to show up, there you go.
If I purchased the book, WXPython Recipes,
is it still relevant or outdated?
I'm not familiar with this book, yeah?
Is this yours?
- I have a DbxPython cookbook from A-Press.
I believe the examples in it still work,
but they're kind of like all over the place.
I tried to group them intelligently,
but I mean, they're helpful,
but they're not going to like help you.
I don't know how to describe it,
but they're more like, these are very specific things.
So read the table of contents before you buy that one.
If he's talking about Cody Precord's book,
which is DbX Python recipes from Pact Publishing.
I haven't read it in a while, so I don't remember.
- Yeah, and I have no experience with it,
but check out this one.
This has got at least 10 good little apps in it.
- For sure. - Yeah.
- Okay, so I guess with that,
I'll ask you the final two questions
that I always ask everyone.
If you're gonna write some Python code,
what editor are you using these days?
I'm still a big fan of wing IDE from wingware.
- Cool, so I hear a lot of people
on the VS Code wagon these days, like why wing?
- For me, I still like that it has a source,
what do you call it, a source assistant,
which basically shows you the doc strings
and links to the documentation live at all times
for whatever line of code you're on.
So, you know, if you have imported something,
it'll show you all that stuff
and basically help you learn new modules as you work.
The other thing I really like is the debugger.
The debugger on it is really good.
- Yeah, fantastic.
Okay, and then notable PyPI package.
I mean, there's always WXPython,
if you want to throw that one out there,
but if you got another one in mind, what do you-
- For me, it'd probably be OpenPyXL
because I've been working with it a lot
in the last couple of months.
- Yeah.
Open PyXL basically lets you read and write Excel files,
the newer format, right?
The Excel SX version? - Correct.
Yes, it does.
- And you can do formulas and formatting
and everything, is that right?
- My formulas are kind of iffy,
but the rest of it is, it does do.
- Nice.
Very cool.
So, so many people, I'm sure,
receive Excel files all of the time,
and they want to like process it with code
rather than with a mouse and keyboard.
So very nice. - Yes.
- Awesome, awesome.
All right, well, final call to action.
People wanna get started with WXPython, what do they do?
- I think you can check out my book
or you can just go to wxpython.org
and get everything you need right there.
- And I'll put a link to that in the show notes.
So thanks everyone for listening and Mike,
thanks for all you're doing around the GUI stuff.
- Oh, thank you so much for having me.
- You bet, bye.
- Bye.
- Thanks everyone in the live stream.
Catch you next time.
[BLANK_AUDIO]